SAID THERE WAS "NO EXCUSE" FOR
THE PROBLEMS PLAGUING THE NEW
HEALTH CARE WEB SITE, BUT
DEFENDED THE BROADER LAW.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY, A REPORT
FROM DETROIT ON THE BATTLE BACK
FROM BANKRUPTCY, AN EFFORT TO
BREATHE LIFE INTO BLIGHTED
NEIGHBORHOODS AND STRUGGLING
BUSINESSES.
WE'RE GOING TO TO BE THE
NEIGHBORHOOD AND BE
POSITIVE.
>> ON IN CHINA WITH
POLLUTIONS LEVELS 40 TIMES
THE ACCEPTABLE LIMIT SHUT
DOWN A CITY OF 11 MILLION
PEOPLE.
>> PEOPLE WALKED OUT OF
THEIR HOUSES TODAY, AND
THOUGHT THAT THERE WAS A
BLIZZARD.
BUT IN FACT IT WASN'T
SNOWINGING THIS IS HOW
INTENSE THE AIR POLLUTION
WAS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING
ON TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: OUR LEAD STORY
TONIGHT, THE PRESIDENT TODAY
JOINED THE WAVE OF CRITICISM
THAT HAS GREETED THE ROCKY
ROLLOUT OF ONLINE EFFORTS TO GET
PEOPLE TO SIGN UP FOR HEALTH
INSURANCE.
HE CONCEDED THE FEDERAL WEB SITE
CENTRAL TO THE PROCESS HAS
FAILED TO DELIVER.
FROM THE OUTSET HEALTH
CARE.GOV HAS BEEN PLAGUED
WITH PROBLEMS WITHIN HOUR
AFTER HOUR AFTER HOUR OF
JUST TRYING TO FIND THE
ANSWER TO THE QUESTION WHERE
AM I GOING TO HAVE MY
INSURAN ANDCE WHAT'S IT
GOING TO COST.
>> FOR THE FIRST WEEK I
TRIED II, THREE DIFFERENT
DAYS TO TRY TO JUST LOG ON.
>> AT FORDABLE CARE ACT-- .
>> Reporter: BUT TODAY IN
THE WHITE HOUSE ROSE GARDEN
PRESIDENT OBAMA ADDED HIS
OWN CRITICISM TO THE MIX,
SAYING THERE IS NO EXCUSE
FOR WHAT HE CALLS KINKS IT
IN THE SYSTEM.
>> THERE'S NO SUGAR-COATING
IT.
THE WEB SITE HAS BEEN TOO
SLOW.
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN GETTING
STUCK DURING THE APPLICATION
PROCESS.
AND I THINK IT'S FAIR TO SAY
THAT NOBODY'S MORE
FRUSTRATED BY THAT THAN I AM
IDES HEALTH CARE.GOV OPENED
FOR BUSINESS ON OCTOBER 1st.
THE PRESIDENT SAID TODAY
THERE HAVE BEEN NEARLY 20
MILLION VISITS SINCE THEN.
AND ACCORDING TO
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS,
FEARLY HALF A MILLION PEOPLE
HAVE APPLIED FOR INSURANCE
THERE AND ON STATE-RUN WEB
SITES.
THEY WON'T SAY HOW MANY HAVE
ACTUALLY ENROLLED.
THE PRESIDENT OFFER THOSE
EXPLANATION TODAY FOR WHY
THE ROLLOUT HAS BEEN SO
CHAOTIC.
BUT HE EMPHASIZED THERE ARE
OTHER WAYS TO ENROLL.
>> NOBODY'S MADDER THAN ME
ABOUT THE FACT THAT THE WEB
SITE ISN'T WORKING AS WELL
AS IT SHOULD, WHICH MEANS
IT'S GOING TO GET FIXED.
(APPLAUSE)
AND IN THE MEANTIME, YOU CAN
BYPASS THE WEB SITE AND
APPLY BY PHONE OR IN PERSON.
SO DON'T LET PROBLEMS WITH
THE WEB SITE DETER YOU FROM
SIGNING UP OR SIGNING YOUR
FAMILY UP.
OR SHOWING YOUR FRIENDS HOW
TO SIGN UP.
BECAUSE IT IS WORTH IT.
IT WILL SAVE YOU MONEY.
>> Ifill: A NATIONAL SURVEY
BY THE PEW RESEARCH CENTER
FOUND 46% OF AMERICANS DON'T
THINK THE HEALTH CARE
EXCHANGES ARE WORKING
COMPARED TO 29% WHO THINK
THEY ARE.
THE WEB SITE TROUBLES HAVE
ALSO FUELED NEW ATTACKS BY
REPUBLICANS.
SENATOR JOHN McCAIN APPEARED
SUNDAY ON CNN.
>> IT'S BEEN A FEE AS CO.
SEND AIR FORCE OUT TO
SILICON VALLEY, LOAD UP WITH
SMART PEOPLE, BRING IT BACK
TO WASHINGTON AND FIX THIS
PROVNLT IT'S RIDICULOUS AND
EVERYBODY KNOWS THAT.
>> Ill: fiTHE PRESIDENT SAID
TODAY HIS REPUBLICAN CRITICS
ARE ROOTING FOR FAILURE.
BUT THAT CONSULTANTS AND
CONTRACTORS HAVE BEEN CALLED
IN TO FIX THE WEB PROBLEMS.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
>> Ifill: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
THIS STORY AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
THE SUPREME COURT WILL CONSIDER
HOW STATES DECIDE WHO IS
MENTALLY FIT TO FACE THE DEATH
PENALTY.
THE JUSTICES ACCEPTED THE CASE
OF A CONDEMNED KILLER IN
FLORIDA.
HIS I.Q. IS JUST OVER THE LEVEL
CLASSIFIED AS MENTALLY DISABLED
UNDER STATE LAW.
IN 2002, THE COURT BARRED
EXECUTIONS OF MENTALLY DISABLED
DEFENDANTS, BUT LEFT IT TO THE
STATES TO JUDGE WHO MEETS THE
CRITERIA.
NEW JERSEY TODAY OFFICIALLY
JOINED THE RANKS OF STATES WHERE
GAY MARRIAGE IS LEGAL.
SAME-SEX WEDDINGS BEGAN UNDER A
STATE JUDGE'S RULING ISSUED LAST
MONTH.
ANGOVED RNOR CHRIS CHRISTIE
DECIDED TO DROP FURTHER LEGAL
CHALLENGES.
MORE ON THIS, LATER IN THE
PROGRAM.
THE SAN FRANCISCO REGION BEGAN
THE WEEK HOBBLED BY A TRANSIT
STRIKE THAT SHUT DOWN THE
NATION'S FIFTH LARGEST COMMUTER
RAIL SYSTEM.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT KWAME
HOLMAN.
.
>> Reporter: HEADACHES AND
DELAYS GREETED COMMUTERS
THIS MORNING WITH THE BAY
AREA RAPID TRANSIT RAIL
SYSTEM CLOSED UNTIL FURTHER
NOTICE.
>> SO I'M TRYING OUT THINGS
I HAVEN'T TRIED BEFORE.
I'LL SEE WHAT HAPPENS BUT
I'LL TRY TO WORK FROM HOME
THE REST OF THE WEEK IF THIS
CONTINUES.
MORE THAN 2,000 UNIONIZE ODD
EMPLOYEES WALKED OFF THE JOB
EARLY FRIDAY OVER PAY RAISES
AND WORKPLACE RULES.
CONTRACT TALKS MADE LITTLE
PROGRESS OVER THE WEEKEND
LEAVING BART'S AVERAGE DAILY
RIDERSHIP OF 400,000 TO FIND
OTHER WAYS TO WORK.
HEAVY TRAFFIC CLOGGED TOLL
PLAZAS AND SNARLED MAJOR
ROADWAYS AND COMMUTERS
FORMED LONG LINES FOR
FERRIES, CHARTER BUSES AND
EVEN CARPOOLS.
>> I'M SITTING HERE AS
OPPOSED TO GOING TO BART AND
IT'S PROBABLY GOING TO BE
ANOTHER HOUR AN 30 MINUTES
BEFORE I GET TO MY OFFICE
WHICH MEANS LESS
PRODUCTIVITY FOR ME AND
EVERYONE THERE WITH ME.
I WISH I HAD THE BENEFITS
THESE PEOPLE GETMENT I'M ALL
FOR LABOR BUT THESE GUYS ARE
LIVING IN THE '90s.
>> STRIKERS INCLUDING
MECHANIC GREGORY GRAY SAID
THEY HAD NO CHOICE.
>> I DON'T WANT TO BE OUT
HERE ON THE LINE.
I WOULD JUST RATHER BE AT
WORK.
I'M TO THE GETTING PAID
TODAY.
I MEAN I WORK TO GET A
PAYCHECK.
SO AND I KNOW IT'S REALLY
BAD FOR COMMUTERS.
>> Reporter: AMID THE
STRIKES TWO TRANSIT
EMPLOYEES WERE KILLED OVER
OT WEEKEND BY AN OUT OF
SERVICE TRAIN.
THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY BOARD HAS OPENED AN
IN
IT WAS UNCLEAR WHETHER THE
WORK STOPPAGE OR BART'S USE
OF NONSTRIKING WORKERS
PLAYED A ROLE.
>> Ifill: LATER THE TRANSIT
AGENCY AND UNIONS SAID THEY
RESUME TALKS ON ENDING THE
STRIKE.
THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT CALLED ON
THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR TODAY TO
EXPLAIN THE LATEST REVELATION
INVOLVING THE U.S. NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY.
THE FRENCH NEWSPAPER "LE MONDE"
SAID THE N.S.A. COLLECTED MORE
THAN 70 MILLION FRENCH PHONE
RECORDS IN A 30-DAY PERIOD.
HE ACKNOWLEDGED THERE ARE
LEGITIMATE QUESTIONS TO
ADDRESS.
IN IRAQ, SEVEN POLICEMEN WERE
KILLED TODAY, WHEN GUNMEN AND A
SUICIDE BOMBER ATTACKED A POLICE
HEADQUARTERS IN FALLUJAH, A
FORMER AL-QAEDA STRONGHOLD.
THE ASSAULT FOLLOWED A BLOODY
WEEKEND.
ON SUNDAY, A SUICIDE BOMBER
KILLED AT LEAST 38 PEOPLE
OUTSIDE A CAFE IN A MAINLY
SHIITE DISTRICT OF BAGHDAD.
NEARLY 400 IRAQIS HAVE DIED IN
THE VIOLENCE THIS MONTH ALONE.
FIRE CREWS IN AUSTRALIA ARE
STILL STRUGGLING AGAINST SCORES
OF WILDFIRES IN THE FA OF CEHOT,
WINDY WEATHER.
THE HUGE BLAZES HAVE ALREADY
DESTROYED MORE THAN 200 HOMES
OUTSIDE SYDNEY, AND KILLED AT
LEAST ONE PERSON.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
JOHN SPARKS OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
IN A.
>> FROM A DISTANCE GIANT
PLUMS OF SMOKE FILLED THE
SKY.
UP CLOSE, HOWEVER, IT LOOKED
LIKE AN INFERNO.
BALLS OF FIRE MOVING QUICKLY
THROUGH THE BUSH LAND OF NEW
SOUTH WALES.
AND THE PEOPLE WHO RUN THIS
STATE ARE WORRIED.
THEY'VE CALLED IT AN
UNPARALLELED EMERGENCY.
WITH THE SUBURBS OF THE
COUNTRY'S LARGEST CITY,
SYDNEY, NOW UNDER THREAT.
>> WE HAVE LOOKED AT BEST
CASE, WORST CASE, AND IN
BETWEEN SCENARIOS.
AND NO MATTER WHICH SCENARIO
YOU LOOK AT, THERE IS GOING
TO BE A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
OF FIRE ACTIVITY.
>> Reporter: BUSH FIRES ARE
COMMON IN AUSTRALIA.
BUT THE WINTER MONTHS
BROUGHT LITTLE RAIN AND THE
FIRES HAVE COME EARLY.
FANNED BY STRONG WINDS,
THEY'VE RACED THROUGH
COMMUNITIES OF SYDNEY'S
OUTSKIRTS.
>> A STATE OF EMERGENCY HAS
BEEN DECLARED GIVING
OFFICIALS THE POWER TO ORDER
EVACUATIONS.
AND WITH TEMPERATURES AND
WIND SPEEDS EXPECTED TO RISE,
THEY WILL PROBABLY HAVE TO
USE IT.
RESIDENTS IN THE BLUE
MOUNTAINS TO THE WEST OF
SYDNEY ARE PARTICULARLY
VULNERABLE.
>> SO MANY PEOPLE PRAYING
FOR US.
ANYTHING CAN HAPPEN.
I'M HOPING THAT IT WILL BE
ALL RIGHT.
>> Reporter: FOR MANY IT'S
TOO LATE.
THEIR HOMES HAVE BEEN
REDUCED TO ASH.
BUT THE FIRES ARE RANDOM.
OTHER PROPERTIES ARE LEFT
UNSCATHED.
THESE PICTURES TAKEN BY A
FIREFIGHTER ON HIS WAY HOME.
THE DANGERS ARE IMMENSE.
IF MULTIPLE BUSH FIRES MERGE,
THE AUTHORITIES MAY HAVE
WHAT IS KNOWN AS A MEGAFIRE
TO DEAL WITH.
>> Reporter: PEOPLE
>> Ifill: PEOPLE IN HARBIN,
CHINA, FACED A BLANKET OF  TOXIC
SMOG TODAY THAT SET NEW RECORDS.
AUTHORITIES SHUT DOWN SCHOOLS
AND GROUNDED FLIGHTS, AFTER AIR
POLLUTION LEVELS SOARED TO 40
TIMES THE INTERNATIONAL
STANDARD.
THE REGION HAS ENTERED ITS
"HIGH-SMOG SEASON," AS MORE COAL
IS BEING BURNED FOR HEATING.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THIS, LATER
IN THE PROGRAM.
EVACUEES WHO LIVED NEAR JAPAN'S
FUKUSHIMA NUCLEAR PLANT COULD
WAIT THREE MORE YEARS BEFORE
THEY GO HOME.
THE ENVIRONMENT MINISTRY SAID
TODAY THEY'RE DELAYING CLEANUP
FOR SIX OF THE 11 AFFECTED
VILLAGES, AS THEY DETERMINE
WHERE TO STORE AND DISPOSE OF
CONTAMINATED WASTE.
AN EARTHQUAKE AND TSUNAMI
TRIGGERED A MELTDOWN OF THREE
REACTORS AT THE PLANT IN MARCH
2011.
WALL STREET HAD A QUIET DAY TO
BEGIN THE WEEK.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST SEVEN POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,392.
THE NASDAQ ROSE FIVE POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3920.
ALSO AHEAD ON THE NEWSHOUR, HOW
THE STUMBLING ROLLOUT OF
HEALTHCARE.GOV COULD SLOW THE
ENACTMENT OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT; AN UPDATE ON GAY MARRIAGE
IN THE STATES; BRINGING BACK
DETROIT FROM BANKRUPTCY; J.P.
MORGAN'S POTENTIAL $13 BILLION
SETTLEMENT WITH THE GOVERNMENT;
FORMER SENATE MAJORITY LEADER
TRENT LOTT ON THE FUTURE OF THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY; AND A SUPER
SMOG SHUTS DOWN A MAJOR CHINESE
CITY.
>> Ifill: NOW, THE ROCKY START
OF THE NEW HEALTH CARE
EXCHANGES.
INTERNET EXPERTS HAVE SUGGESTED
IT MAY TAKE WEEKS TO FULLY FIX
THE FEDERALLY RUN WEB SITE SO
THAT IT RUNS SMOOTHLY FOR
CONSUMERS AS DEADLINES APPROACH
THIS WINTER.
WE LOOK AT WHAT'S AT RISK,
POLITICALLY AND PRAGMATICALLY.
SHERRY GLIED WAS AN ASSISTANT
SECRETARY IN THE DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES FOR
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
SHE LEFT LAST YEAR, AND IS NOW
THE DEAN OF THE NEW YORK
UNIVERSITY WAGNER GRADUATE
SCHOOL OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
AND GAIL WILENSKY, A HEALTH
ECONOMIST AT PROJECT HOPE.
SHE'S SERVED ON NUMEROUS
GOVERNMENT ADVISORY BOARDS AND
OVERSAW MEDICARE AND MEDICAID
FOR PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W. BUSH.
WELCOME
TO YOU BOTH, TO THE NEWSHOUR,
SHERRY GLIED TO YOU FIRST,
YOU WERE IN THE GOVERNMENT
AT THE DEPARTMENT UP UNTIL A
YEAR AGO, HOW SERIOUS DO YOU
UNDERSTAND THIS PROBLEM TO
BE?
>> WELL, I HAVEN'T HEARD
DIRECTLY FROM ANYONE IN THE
DEPARTMENT IT SEEMS THAT THE
BIG PROBLEMS HAVE TO DO WITH
THE INITIAL INTERFACE WITH
THE WEB SITE AND THAT
DOESN'T REALLY SEEM TO BE
GOING VERY WELL YET.
HOPEFULLY IT WILL BE FIXED
SOON.
BUT AT THIS POINT THERE'S A
REAL PROBLEM IN TERMS OF
JUST ACCESSING THE COVERAGE
OPTIONS.
AND GAIL WILENSKY, WHAT IS
YOUR SENSE OF HOW SERIOUS
THIS IS?
>> IT VERY SERIOUS.
MANY OF US THOUGHT THE
ROLLOUT MIGHT BE A BIT ROCKY
AND BUMPY.
I DON'T THINK ANYONE
ANTICIPATED THE KIND OF
DIFFICULTIES AND FRUSTRATIONS
THAT PEOPLE ARE REPORTING.
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS A
COUPLE OF WEEKS TO GET THIS
FIXED.
BUT IT NEEDS TO DO IT IN A
HURRY.
OTHERWISE THE QUESTION OF
WHETHER PEOPLE WILL BE ABLE
TO ENROLL BEFORE JANUARY 1st
STARTS BECOMES A SERIOUS
ISSUE.
AND OF COURSE THE QUESTION
OF WHEN THEY'LL BE LIABLE IF
THEY DON'T HAVE COVERAGE
ALSO IS GOING TO GET RAISED.
>> Woodruff: WELL, SHERRY
GLIED, LET'S TALK ABOUT
THAT.
WHAT ARE THE RISK, FIRST OF
ALL POLITICALLY, IF THIS
ISN'T FIXED QUICKLY?
>> WELL, I GUESS, YOU KNOW,
YOU REALLY HAVE TO SEPARATE
THE SHORT TERM AND LONG-TERM
PROBLEMS.
THE SHORT-TERM PROBLEMS OVER
THE NEXT MONTH OR SO THERE
WILL BE A LOT OF OVERSIGHT T
WILL BE AUGUSTLY AND
UNPLEASANT.
A LOT OF PEOPLE TALKING
ABOUT WHAT A DISASTER IT IS.
THE REAL QUESTION IS WHETHER
THE WEB SITE CAN GET GOING
AND ENROLLMENT CAN REALLY
PICK UP AROUND DECEMBER.
BECAUSE THAT'S WHEN PEOPLE
NEED TO ENROLL IN ORDER TO
BE ABLE TO GET COVERAGE
BEGINNING IN JANUARY.
AND THE PERIOD BETWEEN
DECEMBER AND MARCH, WHICH IS
WHEN THE MANDATE KICKS IN IS
REALLY THE PERIOD WHEN WE
REALLY EXPECT PEOPLE TO GET
ENROLLING IN COVERAGE.
SO THAT'S WHAT IS REALLY
CRITICAL.
AS LONG AS THE PROBLEMS ARE
FIXED BEFORE SAY
MID-DECEMBER, THINGS SHOULD
BE FINE, EXCEPT FOR THE
SHORT TERM UNPLEASANTNESS,
POLITICAL UNPLEASANTNESS.
THE PROBLEM IS IF IT GOES ON
AFTER THAT DEADLINES WILL
START TO BE MISSED.
IT WILL BE HARDER TO GET THE
KIND OF ENROLLMENT IN THE
FIRST PART OF THE PROGRAM
THAT THE ADMINISTRATION HAS
BEEN HOPING FOR.
>> Woodruff: GAIL WILENSKY
DO YOU SEE THE TIME LINE AS
SHERRY GLIED JUST DESCRIBED
IT, AND HOW DOES THE
POLITICAL REACTION PLAY INTO
THIS?
>> I THINK THE TIME LINE IS
A LITTLE SHORTER.
WHAT I HAVE BEEN HEARING AND
TALKING TO PEOPLE IS THE
ADMINISTRATION REALLY NEEDS
TO HAVE THIS PROBLEM
RESOLVED BY MID-NOVEMBER.
OTHERWISE ONE OF THE
PROBLEMS THAT PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN WORRYING ABOUT, THAT IT
WILL BE THE PREDICTABLY HIGH
USERS THAT WILL DO WHATEVER
IT TAKES TO ENROLL.
BUT GETTING THE YOUNG
IMMORTALS, PEOPLE WHO ARE
LIKELY TO BE LOW-USERS,
THEY'RE GOING GET
DISCOURAGED EASILY BECAUSE
THEY WEREN'T REALLY SURE
THEY WANTED INSURANCE IN
MANY CASES IN THE FIRST
PLACE.
THEY'RE THE ONES THAT YOU
WORRY ABOUT.
IF THEY DON'T PURSUE GETTING
INSURANCE, THE PREMIUMS THAT
WILL RESULT WILL BE
UNSUSTAINABLE.
THAT'S THE BIGGEST RISK IN
THIS FIRST YEAR THAT ONLY
THE HIGH USERS WILL GO
THROUGH WHATEVER IT TAKES TO
GET THE INSURANCE THAT THEY
HAVE WANTED OR HAVE HAD IN
THESE HIGH RISK POOLS.
THE POLITICS ARE TO RAISE
QUESTIONS ABOUT WILL THE
ADMINISTRATION BE
FORTHCOMING.
THUS FARHOW
MANY PEOPLE HAVE ENROLLED
ISN'T HELPING RESTORE THE
CONFIDENCE THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION UNDERSTANDS
IT HAS TO GET IT FIXED.
AND WILL BE FORTHRIGHT WITH
WHAT THEY KNOW.
THE PRESIDENT, I KNOW,
ATTEMPTED TO CORRECT SOME OF
THAT TODAY BY HIS VERY
STRONG STATEMENTS.
MY ADVICE IS SHARE THE
INFORMATION ON ENROLLMENT,
BIWEEKLY AS YOU HAVE THEM.
THEY DON'T HAVE TO BE REAL
HIGH NOW.
THEY HAVE TO START GETTING
HIGH BY THE TIME DECEMBER
ROLLS AROUND.
>> Woodruff: AN SHERRY GLIED,
I MEAN HOW-- HOW MUCH MORE
TRANSPARENT CAN THE
ADMINISTRATION BE AND SHOULD
THEY BE?
>> WELL, I'M HOPING THAT
THEY'LL START TO PUT
ENROLLMENT FIGURES OUT IN
EARLY NOVEMBER.
I GUESS IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT TO KNOW THAT THE
YOUNG IMMORTALS, THE PEOPLE
WE EXPECT WILL GET COVERAGE
JUST BECAUSE OF THE MANDATE,
THE EXPERIENCE WE FIND IN
MASSACHUSETTS IS THOSE
PEOPLE ARE THE VERY LAST
ONES TO SIGN.
THEY ARE GOING TO BE THE
ONES SIGNING UP IN FEBRUARY
AND MARCH.
SO IN THAT SENSE I THINK
THEY HAVE A LITTLE BIT MORE
TIME ON THE CLOCK.
AND WE WILL BE REALLY
INTERESTED IN LOOKING AT THE
ENROLLMENT FIGURES AS
JANUARY, FEBRUARY AND MARCH
COME AROUND.
YOU EXPECT TO SEE THE EARLY
ENROLLMENTS TO BE MOSTLY
PEOPLE WHO ARE REALLY SICK
AND ARE TRANSITIONING WOULD
THE EXCHANGES.
>> Woodruff: STAYING WITH
YOU, SHERRY GLIED, WHAT
ABOUT THE POINT THAT GAIL
WILENSKY MADE THAT IT'S
REALLY A NOVEMBER DEADLINE,
THAT IF THINGS DON'T START
GETTING BETTER BY NOVEMBER
IT'S GOING TO CREATE BIGGER
PROBLEMS DOWN THE ROAD?
>> WELL, IT WOULD CERTAINLY
BE NICE IF THINGS STARTED
GETTING BETTER IN NOVEMBER.
BUT I DO THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT TO LOOK AT THE
EXPERIENCE OF OTHER PROGRAMS,
PRIOR EXPERIENCE WITH DOING
THINGS LIKE THIS, IS THAT
THE PEOPLE YOU REALLY WORRY
ABOUT WHO ARE THOSE YOUNG,
HEALTHY PEOPLE, THEY'RE NOT
THE ONES WHO ARE ENROLLING
IN NOVEMBER FOR SOMETHING
THEY DON'T HAVE TO BUY UNTIL
MARCH.
SO YOU KNOW, I THINK WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO BE SEEING IN
THE EARLY DAYS IS REALLY
PEOPLE WHO ARE VERY ANXIOUS
ABOUT GETTING COVERAGE, WHO
ARE SIGNING UP.
AND THAT'S KIND OF
CONSISTENT WITH WHAT WE HAVE
ALREADY SEEN.
IF YOU ARE LOOKING AT THE
NEWS REPORTS IN A COUPLE OF
WEEKS BEFORE THE ROLLOUT
HAPPENED, WHAT EVERYONES
WITH WORRIED ABOUT IS THAT
NO ONE WOULD HIT THE
EXCHANGES.
ALL THE STORIES WAS NOBODY
KNEW ANYTHING ABOUT THIS AND
NO ONE WAS GOING TO SIGN.
INSTEAD THERE HAS BEEN THIS
ENORMOUS RUSH OF PEOPLE AND
I THINK THEY HAVE MOSTLY
BEEN, A LOT OF THEM ARE
CURIOUS, YOU KNOW, CURIOSITY,
PEOPLE WITHOUT ARE JUST
CURIOUS ABOUT HOW THE WHOLE
THING IS WORKING AND MANY OF
THE OTHERS ARE THE SICKER
PEOPLE TRYING TO GET
COVERAGE TO REPLACE COVERAGE
THEY ALREADY HAVE.
>> Woodruff: GATE WILENSKY
ARE THERE OTHER THINGS THE
ADMINISTRATION CAN DO.
CLEARLY THEY'VE GOT PEOPLE
WORKING NONSTOP ON THIS, WE
ARE FOLD THE CONTRACTORS,
THE PEOPLE WORKING ON THE
ARE NOW GOING TO TESTIFY ON
THE HILL BEFORE COMMITTEES
LOOKING INTO THIS LATER THIS
ECK WOULD.
BUT WHAT ELSE, I MEAN ARE WE
POTENTIALLY TALKING ABOUT
DELAYING THE DEADLINE?
>> WELL, THAT'S CERTAINLY
GOING TO BE REGARDED AS A
LAST RESORT BY THE
ADMINISTRATION.
THE ADMINISTRATION MADE A
POLICY CALL EARLY ON THAT I
THINK HAS EXACERBATED THE
PROBLEM.
THEY DIDN'T WANT TO HAVE
PEOPLE DO WHAT IS CALLED
ANONYMOUSLY BROWSE.
THAT IS LOOK AT THE
DIFFERENT OPTION OS BEFORE
THEY ACTUALLY ENROLL AND
SIGN UP.
AND THE CONCERN WAS THAT IF
THEY SAW THE PREMIUM PRICE
WITHOUT THE SUBSIDY THAT
THEY COULD BE ELIGIBLE TO
RECEIVE, THAT MIGHT SCARE
SOME PEOPLE OFF.
BUT WHAT IT MEANT IS THAT
MANY PEOPLE WHO RIGHT NOW
ARE JUST LOOKING TO SEE WHAT
THE OPTIONS ARE, HAVE TO GO
THROUGH THAT VERY ARDUOUS
ENROLLMENT PROCESS BEFORE
THEY CAN GET THAT
INFORMATION.
NOW I'VE BEEN TOLD MULTIPLE
TIMES THAT THERE IS A
DIFFERENT WAY THAT YOU CAN
DO IT NOW.
BUT WHEN I PERSONALLY HAVE
GONE ON THE WEB SITE TO SEE
WHETHER I CAN FIND THAT WAY
OF LOOKING AT THE PLAN
CHOICES AND NOT HAVING TO
ENROLL T TAKES ME ABOUT SIX
SCREENS AND THEN I GET
DUMPED BACK INTO THE ENROLL
NOW REQUEST.
SO IF IT IS ON, IT'S NOT
OBVIOUS TO SOMEBODY WHO IS
REASONABLY PROFICIENT IN
GETTING AROUND THE WEB SITE.
>> Woodruff: WELL, A WORK IN
PROGRESS IN MORE WAYS THAN
ONE, GAIL WILENSKY, SHERRY
GLIED, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NEW JERSEY BECAME THE
LATEST STATE TO LEGALIZE GAY
MARRIAGE TODAY, BUT IT'S NOT THE
ONLY STATE TAKING MATRIMONIAL
MATTERS INTO ITS OWN HANDS.
RAY SUAREZ HAS THAT.
> Suarez: SAME-SEX COUPLES
MARRIED BY NEWARK MAYOR AND
SENATOR-ELECT CORY BOOKER IN THE
GARDEN STATE WERE MET WITH SOME
WELCOME NEWS AS THEY EXCHANGED
NUPTUALS.
GOVERNOR CHRIS CHRISTIE'S MOVE
DROPPING THE APPEAL MAKES NEW
JERSEY THE 14th STATE TO ALLOW
GAY MARRIAGE, ALONG WITH THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
35 STATES HAVE LAWS OR
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS IN
PLACE TO RESTRICT SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE.
JOINING ME NOW TO OUTLINE WHAT'S
HAPPENING IS DAVID CRARY.
HE REPORTS ON SOCIAL ISSUES AND
POLICIES AS A NATIONAL WRITER AT
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS.
CHRIS CHRISTIE SAID HE WAS
GOING TO PURSUE THIS A
PEOPLE.
HE SAID HE PREFERRED THAT
EITHER THE LEGISLATURE OR
THE VOTERS OF NEW JERSEY
CHANGE THE LAW.
DID IT SURPRISE PEOPLE THAT
HE DROPPED HIS OPPOSITION?
>> I THINK IT WAS ONLY
SURPRISING, RAY, THE SPEED
WITH WHICH HE DID IT.
IT WAS CLEAR THAT HE DECIDED
IT THIS WAS GOING TO BE A
LOSING EFFORT ON HIS PART.
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW
JERSEY WAS PRETTY CLEAR HOW
IT WOULD HAVE RULED
EVENTUALLY.
SO VERY QUICKLY HE SAID I'M
GOING TO DROP THE FIGHT.
WE'LL HAVE SAME-SEX MARRIAGE
HERE IN NEW JERSEY.
>> Suarez: THE ATTENTION WAS
ON NEW JERSEY TODAY BUT IS
THIS REALLY A STRUGGLE
THAT'S NOW IN MULTIPLE
VENUES ON MULTIPLE FRONTS
WHERE IS THE ACTION?
>> IT'S ALL OVER THE PLACE,
RAY.
I THINK THERE ARE AT LEAST
13 OTHER STATES THAT HAVE
ACTIVE PENDING LAWSUITS OVER
SAME SEX MARRIAGE NOW.
SOME COULD BE RESOLVED
FAIRLY QUICKLY.
SOME ARE LIKELY TO DRAG ON
INTO NEXT YEAR.
THERE'S ALSO ACTION IN SOME
STATE LEGISLATURES, ILLINOIS
IN PARTICULAR.
THERE'S ALSO EFFORTS TO GET
THIS ISSUE ON TO THE BALLOT
IN 2014, IN STATES LIKE
OREGON.
SO IT'S A MULTIFACETED,
MULTISTATE THING THAT COULD
PLAY OUT VERY QUICKLY WITHIN
A YEAR OR TWO.
>> Suarez: BUT LOOKING AT
THE CALENDAR, WHO ARE THE
NEXT BATTERS UP?
WHERE IS ACTION REALLY VERY
CLOSE TO HAVING TO BE TAKEN?
>> NEW MEXICO, RAY, THERE'S
GOING TO BE A HEARING IN THE
STATE SUPREME COURT THIS
WEEK UNLESS THEY CHANGE THE
PLANS IN NEW MEXICO'S A
FASCINATING STATEMENT
BECAUSE IT'S THE ONLY STATE
WITH NO LAW SPECIFICALLY
LEGALIZING SAME SAKS
MARRIAGE OR OUTLAWING IT.
IT'S KIND OF A GRAY AREA.
EIGHT OF THE 33 COUNTIES
HAVE STARTED ISSUING SAME
SEX MARRIAGE LICENSES.
THE OTHERS HAVE NOT.
THE STATE SUPREME COURT IS
BEING ASKED TO TRY TO SORT
OUT THAT VERY FASCINATING
SITUATION.
WEEK.
>> Suarez: NEW MEXICO IS ONE
OF ONLY, ONE OF A HANDFUL OF
STATES WHERE COUNTY
OFFICIALS HAVE TAKEN MATTERS
INTO THEIR OWN HANDS, CITING
THE SUPREME COURT DECISIONS
OF THE LAST TERM AS THEIR
BASIS FOR DOING SO.
IN DEFINES OF THEIR OWN
STATE LAWS HAS THIS CHANGED
THE BATTLE?
>> WELL, THAT IS HAPPENED IN
PENNSYLVANIA, IN NORTH
CAROLINA, IN NEW MEXICO,
WHAT IT'S DOING IS KIND OF I
THINK AGAINST SPEEDING UP
THE PROCESS.
IT'S FORCING THE STATE
SUPREME COURT TO REALIZE
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
STEP IN SOONER RATHER THAN
LATER AND KIND OF RECONCILE
THIS INCONSISTENCY FROM
COUNTY TO COUNTY.
SO IT'S A VERY INTERESTING
SITUATION, THESE ACTS OF
LOCAL DEFINES THAT ARE GOING
TO SPEED UP THE STATEWIDE
PROCESS.
>> Suarez: ARE THEY EVEN
EXPANDING THE MAP, TAKING
THE BATTLE TO PLACES THAT
ARE REALLY NOT EXPECTED AS
HOT BEDS OF THIS SOCIAL
QUESTION?
I READ THAT A LAWSUIT IS
MOVING AHEAD IN TENNESSEE.
>> TENNESSEE, FILED JUST
TODAY.
ARKANSAS HAS A LAWSUIT.
THERE ARE TWO RIVAL LAWSUITS
SEEKING MARRIAGE RIGHTS IN
VIRGINIA.
SO IT IS ABSOLUTELY
EXPANDING THE MAP.
I THINK THE GOAL IS TO GET
AS MANY STATES AS POSSIBLE
INTO THIS MARRIAGE CAMP AND
THEN GO BACK TO THE U.S.
SUPREME COURT WITHIN A YEAR,
TWO YEARS, AND SAY LOOK,
THIS IS NOW THE NORM IN THE
U.S. AND IT'S NOT A FEW
LIBERAL STATES AND HAVE THE
SUPREME COURT RECONSIDER THE
ISSUE.
THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN, I
THINK, A QUESTION OF HOW
SOON.
>> Suarez: WITH NEW JERSEY
JOINING THE LIST BECOMES
ONE-THIRD OF ALL AMERICAN
CITIZENS LIVE IN A STATE
WHERE GAY MARRIAGE IS
ALLOWED.
IS IT PRETTY MUCH GOING TO
REACH A SORT OF EQUILIBRIUM
POINT WHERE THOSE STATES
WITH CONSTITUTIONAL
AMENDMENTS OR SPECIFIC BANS
PRETTY MUCH STAY IN THAT
COLUMN, AGE THE ONES THAT
SEEM OPEN TO IT OR HAVE IT
IN PROCESS PRETTY MUCH STAY
IN THAT COLUMN?
ARE WE REACHING STASIS IN
THIS BATTLE?
>> YEAH, I THINK WE ARE.
I THINK, FOR EXAMPLE,
ILLINOIS IS LIKELY TO JOIN
THE SAME-SEX MARRIAGE RANKS
AS A POPULOUS STATE, HAWAII,
OREGON ARE LIKELY.
SO WE COULD GET CLOSE TO
THAT SORT OF HALF THE
COUNTRY THIS, HALF THE
COUNTRY THAT.
AND AT THAT POINT THERE IS
GOING TO BE PRESSURE ON THE
SUPREME COURT, U.S. SUPREME
COURT TO SAY TO ITSELF AS
THEY DID WITH INTERRACIAL
MARRIAGE, WE CAN'T REALLY
HAVE A COUNTRY PERMANENTLY
WITH TWO SYSTEMS OF
MARRIAGE.
SO AT SOME POINT THERE IS
GOING TO BE PRESSURE ON THE
HIGH COURT TO FIGURE THAT
THEY ARE GOING TO HAVE TO
HAVE A UNIFORM MARRIAGE LAW
FOR THIS DIVIDED COUNTRY.
>> Suarez: QUICKLY, WHY
CAN'T WE HAVE TWO MARRIAGE
LAWS, TWO MARRIAGE REGIMES
ACROSS CRIT?
IS THAT NOT SUSTAINABLE OVER
TIME?
>> I THINK A LOT OF LEGAL
EXPERTS WOULD SAY IT'S NOT
SUSTAINABLE OVER TIME.
WE'RE A VERY MOBILE COUNTRY.
PEOPLE MOVE FROM ONE STATE
TO THE OTHER, COMPANIES HAVE
BRANCH OFFICES IN DIFFERENT
STATES.
SO WE'RE MAKING DUE WITH
THAT SPLIT SYSTEM NOW.
I THINK LONG-TERM I DON'T
THINK IT WOULD LAST IN PER
PE FUTURE.
>> Suarez: DAVID CARY FROM
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS, THANKS
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU, RAY.
>> Woodruff: IN JULY, DETROIT
BECAME THE LARGEST AMERICAN CITY
EVER TO FILE FOR BANKRUPTCY.
THAT PROCESS CONTINUES TO
UNFOLD, AND MUCH OF THE NEWS
SINCE HAS BEEN GRIM.
BUT AS JEFFREY BROWN FOUND
RECENTLY, THERE'S ANOTHER SIDE
TO THE STORY OF THIS TROUBLED
CITY.
>> DEVELOPERS, LENDERS
UNDERSTAND NOW THAT THERE IS
A LOT OF FOLKS THAT ARE
MOVING BACK HERE AND WANT TO
MOVE BACK.
>> SEEING THIS PLACE
TRANSFORM, EVEN THOUGH WE
HAVE SO MUCH FURTHER TO GO.
>> I THINK WE'RE SORT OF
EXERCISING NEW MUSCLES AS A
COMMUNITY.
AND I THINK THAT'S HEALTHY.
>> THE COMMUNITY, THE PLACE
THESE PEOPLE ARE SPEAK OF,
DETROIT.
CITIES THAT'S BEEN THE
POSTER CHILD FOR ALL THAT
CAN GO WRONG IN URBAN
AMERICA.
INDUSTRIAL DECLINE,
MISMANAGEMENT, CORRUPTION,
THE LIST GOES ON.
BUT THERE ARE ALSO SIGNS OF
LIFE HERE.
NEW ENERGY, NEW IDEA,EW N
MONEY, NEW POSSIBILITY OF
WHAT DETROIT MIGHT,
EMPHASIZE MIGHT, BECOME.
SO WHAT WOULD WE HAVE SEEN
HERE SAY TEN YEARS AGO.
>> WELL, YOU WOULD HAVE SEEN
A WHOLE BLOCK THAT WAS
VACANT.
WOULD YOU HAVE SEEN, FOR
INSTANCE, AT THIS CORNER A
ONE-STORY CONCRETE BUILDING
THAT HAD SORT OF A NOVELTY
STORE.
WOULD YOU HAVE SEEN A VA
KANSI HERE THAT WAS LAST USE
AS A PORNO THEATRE.
>> A PORNO THEATRE, THAT WAS
THE BUSINESS AROUND HERE.
>> YEAH, THAT WAS THE
BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: SUE MOSEY
DOESN'T LIKE THE TITLE BUT
SHE'S OFTEN CALLED THE MAYOR
OF MIDTOWN.
AN AREA JUST NORTH OF
DOWNTOWN DETROIT THAT'S LONG
BEEN DOWN, YOU CAN STILL SEE
IT, BUT IS NOW ATTRACTING
YOUNG ARTISTS AND
PROFESSIONALS AND SPROUTING
THE KIND OF SHOPS AND
BUSINESSES, THAT WILL
ATTRACT EVEN MORE.
>> IT'S A GOOD DESCRIPTER
FOR DETROIT.
>> MOSEY NONPROFIT
NEIGHBORHOOD ORGANIZATION
MIDTOWN DETROIT HELPS
BUSINESSES GET LOANS, BRINGS
IN DEVELOPERS TO REHAB OLD
BUILDINGS AND ASSISTS
WOULD-BE RENTERS AND BUYERS
WITH DOWN PAYMENTS.
REMEMBER, THIS IS A CITIES
THAT'S LOST TWO-THIRDS OF
ITS POPULATION SINCE ITS
PEAK IN 1950.
BUT THESE DAYS IN THIS AREA,
THERE'S ACTUALLY A WAIT LIST
FOR NEW UNITS.
>> THIS IS ORIGINALLY A 1924
HISTORIC BUILDING THAT WAS
VACANT FOR AT LEAST A DECADE
ORO. S
WE'RE GOING TO BE SPENDING
ABOUT $30 MILLION TO
RENOVATE IT FOR 129 UNITS OF
NEW HOUSING.
>> Reporter: BUT THIS GOES
TO YOUR BIGGEST OBSTACLE, OR
BARRIER STILL, RIGHT S
HOING.US
>> RIGHT.
WE CAN'T PRODUCE IT FAST
ENOUGH.
THERE'S A LOT MORE PEOPLE
WHO WANT TO LIVE HERE RIGHT
NOW THAN WE HAVE CURRENT
HOUSING AVAILABLE.
RTS SOME 12 MILES AWAY IN
THIS GEOGRAPHICALLY HUGE
CITY, IN THE BRIGHTMORE
NEIGHBORHOOD THE DETROIT
WE'VE ALL BECOME MORE
FAMILIAR WITH.
BLOCK AFTER BLOCK OF
ABANDONED, BURNED OUT,
BOARDED UP HOUSES.
BUT HERE TOO THERE ARE SIGNS
OF LIFE.
>> DO YOU LET'S RALLY GO
DOOR-TO-DOOR TO TRY TO GET
PEOPLE INVOLVED?
WHAT DO DOW?
>> I LOT OF TIMES, YES.
WE DO HAVE TO JUST KNOCK ON
SOMEBODY'S DOOR.
>> Reporter: KIRK MAZE HEADS
THE BRITEMORE ALLIANCE, A
COALITION OF MORE THAN 50
NONPROFIT GROUPS TRYING TO
REVITALIZE ONE OF THE CITY'S
MOST BLIGHTED AREAS.
THE MANTRA HERE, RESTORE THE
MORE.
>> THE NAUB HOOD HE IS A
POVERTY STRICTEN COMMUNITY.
YOU HAVE EMERGENCY FOOD
CHALLENGES, WHERE HUNGER IS
AN ISSUE.
LOW EDUCATION OUTCOMES FOR
OUR CHILDREN.
BUT WE DO BELIEVE THAT ANY
OF THESE CHALLENGES, ALL OF
THESE CHALLENGES CAN BE
OVERCOME BY THE RIGHT TIME,
ATTENTION AND FOCUS OF THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE HERE.
SO OUR BIGGEST STRUGGLE IS
GETTING PEOPLE INVOLVED,
GETTING PEOPLE TO BELIEVE
AND TO GRAB ON THAT HOPE
ATTH THINGS CAN CHANGE.
>> Reporter: THE FIRST STEP,
TEARING DOWN AND CLEANING UP
THE ABANDONED MESS.
WE WATCHED AS ONE GROUP
MOTOR CITY BLIGHT BUSTED
REMOVED THE LAST OF FIVE
HOMES ON A SINGLE BRIGHTMORE
BLOCK.
ONE GROWING ALTERNATIVE,
COMMUNITY GARDENS.
THE FOOD AND SIMPLE QUALITY
OF LIFE.
EVEN IF THERE'S STILL TINY
ISLANDS IN A SEA OF
desLATION.
>> SO WE'RE STANDING IN A
NICE GARDEN.
BUT BEHIND YOU IS A BOARDED
UP HOUSE.
ACROSS THE WAY IS A BURNED
OUT BUILDING.
WHAT GOOD IS A GARDEN.
>> A GARDEN DOES MORE THAN
YOU WOULD THINK.
INSPIRING PEOPLE THAT THEIR
HOPE IS NOT SEEDED IN THE
WRONG PLACE.
WE WILL SEE PEOPLE PUTTING
THAT KIND OF WORK IN AND IT
RESULTING INTO SOMETHING
THAT'S BEAUTIFUL TO
EVERYBODY CAN SHARE.
IT DOES START TO MAKE THOSE
LITTLE DIFFERENCES IN
PEOPLE'S LIVES, THAT YOU
WILL SEE, YOU KNOW, YEAH,
THESE ARE SHUTTERED, BOARDED
UP HOMES BUT EVERYBODY'S
GRASS IS CUT.
>> UH-HUH.
>> EVERYBO'S TDYRYING TO DO
THEIR BEST TO MAINTAIN THE
PROGRESS THAT WE MADE AND
THAT'S ENGAGEMENT.
>> Reporter: HUGELY
IMPORTANT TO ANY RESURGENCE,
OF COURSE, AND NOW A MAJOR
TO CUFFS THE ALLIANCE,
CREATING NEW JOBS IN
COMMERCE.
>> WHAT ISSUES ARE YOU
HAVING RIGHT NOW TO RAMP UP
THE CAPACITY.
>> Reporter: EARLIER THIS
YEAR TECHTOWN, A BUSINESS
INCUBATOR LOCATED DOWNTOWN
OPENED AN OFFICE IN
BRIGHTMORE TO OFFER
COUNSELLING FOR MOM AND POP
BUSINESSES LIKE SWEET POTATO
SENSATIONS.
>> 31-YEAR-OLD ESPE THOMAS
WAS THERE FOR HELP ON HOW TO
EXPAND HER FAMILY'S BAKERY,
MAKING ALL THINGS SWEET
POTATO.
>> WE'RE HERE AND WE'RE TO
THE GOING ANYWHERE.
AND WE'RE MAKING BEAUTIFUL
THINGS HAPPEN.
WE'VE GOING TO PUMP THESE
SWEET POTATOES OUT LIKE
CRAZY AND WE'RE GOING TO
JUST MAKE THIS MONEY.
WE'RE GOING TO ADD LOVE TO
THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
WE'RE GOING TO BE-- GOING TO
BE POSITIVE NO MATTER WHAT.
>> Reporter: AND THEN
THERE'S DOWNTOWN.
THE SCALE IS LARGER, THE
PACE OF CHANGE QUICKER.
>> WE BOUGHT THE FIRST
NATIONAL BUILDING.
WE BOUGHT THE CHASE BUILDING,
THE 1001, THE DIME BUILDING,
ALL THE BUILDINGS WITH
LIGHTSES ON THEM.
>> MATT CULLEN, A FORMER
AUTO EXECUTIVE IS PRESIDENT
OF ROCK VENTURES WHICH
MANAGES THE REAL ESTATE AND
INVESTMENTS OF QUICKEN
LOANS.
THE NATION'S LARGEST
MORTGAGE LENDERS.
>> THREE YEARS AGO QING'S
BILLIONAIRE OWNER DAN
GILBERT MOVED HIS
HEADQUARTERS FROM THE
SUBURBS INTO THE HEART OF
THE CITY.
EVEN GIVING WORKERS
SUBSIDIES TO LIVE DOWNTOWN.
THE COMPANY ALSO WENT ON A
BUYING SPREE SPENDING MORE
THAN A BILLION DOLLARS FOR
40 PROPERTIES PURCHASED AT
ROCK BOTTOM PRICES.
BRINGING NEW ENERGY, YES,
BUT ALSO RAISING CONCERNS
ABOUT TURNING DEFROIT INTO A
NEW KIND OF COMPANY TOWN.
>> IS IT CONCEIVABLE THAT
YOU'RE DOING SO MUCH HERE,
YOU COULD ALMOST END UP AS
THE SORT OF MONOPOLY IN
DOWNTOWN DETROIT.
>> WELL, WE COULD.
BUT I DONE THINK THAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN.
WE ARE BUYING BUILDINGS THAT
SAT EMPTY FOR 20, 25 YEARS.
AND NOW THERE ARE BUILDINGS
THAT ARE UP FOR AUCTION AS
RECENTLY AS THE LAST COUPLE
OF WEEKS WHERE THERE ARE ANY
NUMBER OF BIDDERS, FROM
OUTSIDE OF THE AREA, AND
OUTSIDE EVEN THE COUNTRY
HAVE COME IN AND HAVE
INVESTED.
OUR, OUR MANTRA HAS BEEN
COME ON IN, THE WATER'S
FINE.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY.
WE LIKE TO SAY WE CAN DO
GOOD AND DO WELL.
>> PART OF THAT DOING GOOD
IS IMPROVE OG THE DOWNTOWN
PHYSICAL SPACE.
REHABBING BUILDINGS, YES,
BUT ALSO HIRING PRIVATE
STREET CLEANERS, ADDING
A-- PING-PONG TABLES AND
BASKETBALL COURT WHERE
PEOPLE CAN GATHER.
EVEN DRESSING UP STILL EMPTY
STOREFRONT WINDOWS.
OTHER HIGH-TECH COMPANIES
HAVE TAKEN NOTICE.
TWITTER OPENED A SMALL
OFFICE AND GOOGLE WILL SOON
FOLLOW.
AND ROCK VENTURES HAS
INVESTED $17 MILLION TO HELP
A NUMBER OF SMALLER
START-UPS.
>> WE NEED THAT RAW MATERIAL
OF SMART PEOPLE THAT WANT TO
BE HERE AND TO
HELP-- WITHOUT THEM WE CAN'T
BE SUCCESSFUL.
WE HAVE FOUND THAT PEOPLE
REALLY ARE JUST PASSIONATE
AND MOTIVATED ABOUT COMING
TO DETROIT AND GETTING
ENGAGED.
>> Reporter: GRAND GOALS,
INDEED.
BUT SO MANY PROBLEMS, SO
MANY QUESTIONS THAT REMAIN.
INCLUDING WHETHER PARTS OF
DETROIT, DOWNTOWN AND THE
MORE IMPOVERISHED
NEIGHBORHOODS WILL GROW
TOGETHER OR FURTHER APART.
AND WE ASKED HOW LONG WILL
IT TAKE TO CREATE THIS NEW
DETROIT?
>> I THINK IT'S GOING TO
TAKE TEN YEARS, AT LEAST.
>> I WOULD SAY A GOOD TEN
YEARS.
>> ABOUT TEN YEARS.
PEOPLE WILL BE WRITING A
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT STORY
ABOUT DETROIT.
>> Reporter: IN OTHER WORDS,
HOPE, ENERGY, POTENTIAL.
BUT YEARS OF WORK TO COME.
>> Ifill: NOW, WE LOOK AT THE
GOVERNMENT'S APPROACH TOWARD
ACCOUNTABILITY IN THE WAKE OF
THE FINANCIAL CRISIS.
JPMORGAN CHASE, THE NATION'S
LARGEST BANK, IS ON THE VERGE OF
A REPORTED $13 BILLION
SETTLEMENT WITH THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION TO AVOID CIVIL
CHARGES OVER THE SALE OF
TROUBLED MORTGAGE SECURITIES.
R THE BIGGEST PUNISHMENT
YET FOR PLAYERS INVOLVED IN THE
2008 MELTDOWN.
STILL UNCLEAR: WHETHER JPMORGAN
WILL ADMIT TO WRONGDOING AS PART
OF THE DE.AL
EVEN THOUGH THE REPORTED
AGREEMENT IS NOT YET FINAL,
IT'S GENERATING STRONG REACTION.
WE GET A SAMPLING OF THAT NOW
WITH DENNIS KELLEHER, THE
PRESIDENT OF BETTER MARKETS, A
NOT-FOR-PROFIT GROUP PROMOTING
FINANCIAL REFORM, AND BERT ELY,
ANONSULTANT.
FOR THE RECORD, HE DOES NOT
ADVISE JP MORGAN.
I WILL START WITH YOU WHAT
ARE THE OUTLINES OF THIS
DEAL?
>> WELL, WHAT JPMORGAN CHASE
IS TRYING TO SETTLE ARE A
VARIETY OF CLAIMS ARISING
FROM SO PAST ACTIONS BUT
ALSO FROM ACTIONS
PARTICULARLY IN THE MORTGAGE
AREA BY TWO COMPANIES THAT
IT ACQUIRED, BEAR STEARNS
AND WASHINGTON MUTUAL OOIRZ
SO DO YOU THINK THAT THIS
WAS A GOOD DEAL FOR THEM?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT WHAT
JPMORGAN CHASE IS TRYING TO
DO IS TO JUST GET THESE
ISSUES BEHIND IT.
SO THAT IT CAN MOVE ON WITH
ITS BUSINESS THIS HAS BEEN
HANGING OVER THE COMPANY.
AND I THINK LIKE ANY KIND OF
PROBLEM SITUATION YOU WANT
TO GET IT REVOLVED AND MOVE
ON OOIRZ HOW ABOUT THAT,
DENNIS KELLEHER.
>> IT'S A DARN GOOD DEAL FOR
T U
GOOD DEAL FOR EVERYBODY
ELSE.
IN THE FIRST INSTANCE THE
HEADLINE NUMBER GETS A LOT
OF ATTENTION AND IT IS A BIG
NUMBER, $13 BILLION, WHICH
IS A LOT OF MONEY TO
EVERYBODY EXCEPT WALL
STREET.
LAST YEAR JPMORGAN'S REVENUE
WAS MORE THAN 97 BILLION.
TODAY IT HAS MORE THAN 23
BILLION DOLLARS RESERVED FOR
LEGAL PROBLEMS.
AND WHAT'S MOST TROUBLING IS
THAT NOT ONLY ARE THEY
APPARENTLY GOING TO
EXTINGUISH ALMOST ALL CIVIL
LIABILITY FOR INNUMBERABLE
EGREGIOUS VIOLATIONS IN
WRONGDOING RELATING TO
COMPLIANCES IN MORTGAGES AND
OTHER THINGS, BUT NOT A
SINGLE INDIVIDUAL IS BEING
HELD ACCOUNTABLE, YET AGAIN,
FOR ALL THIS WRONGDOING.
AND UNFORTUNATELY, IF WE
DON'T HOLD INDIVIDUALS
RESPONSIBLE AND ACCOUNTABLE,
THEN THESE THINGS ARE GOING
TO HAPPEN AGAIN AND AGAIN
AND AGAIN.
>> Ifill: THE EXPERT ELY,
LET ME ASK YOU THIS
QUESTION.
JPMORGAN IS ONE OF THE
COMPANIES, THAT ACTUALLY
WENT IN AND HELPED RESCUE
TROUBLED PROPERTIES.
AND FOR THEIR EFFORT THEY
GET THIS KIND OF
PROSECUTIONAL, OR POTENTIAL
FOR PROSECUTION.
DID THEY-- DOES THAT
DISCOURAGE ANYBODY ELSE FROM
EVEN TRYING?
>> I THINK IF DEFINITELY
DOES.
THAT IN EFFECT JPMORGAN
CHASE IS BEING TAGGED FOR
PROBLEMS THAT IT DID NOT
CAUSE, THAT HAPPENED UNDER
THE MANAGEMENT OF THE
COMPANIES THAT THEY
ACQUIRED.
AND THAT, FRANKLY S JUST
FUNDAMENTALLY UNFAIR.
AND MORGAN IS NOW STUCK WITH
THIS SITUATION.
BUT IT DEFINITELY IS GOING
TO DISCOURAGE ACQUIRERS IN
THE FUTURE OF TROUBLED
COMPANIES BECAUSE WE WILL
HAVE FINANCIAL CRISES IN THE
FUTURE AND THE GOVERNMENT IS
GOING TO BE FACED AGAIN,
SOMETIME IN THE FUTURE, WITH
HAVING TO SELL TROUBLED
COMPANY THAT HAS A LOT OF
PROBLEMS.
AND POTENTIAL BUYERS ARE
JUST GOING TO STAND BACK AND
SAY NO THANKS.
>> Ifill: WHAT ABOUT DENNIS
KELLEHER POINT THAT $13
BILLION ISN'T REALLY A LOT
OF MONEY.
>> IT IS A LOT OF MONEY.
HE TALKED ABOUT THE REVENUE
OF JPMORGAN CHASE BUT THERE
ARE ALSO ALLOTS OF EXPENSES.
THE $13 BILLION IS ROUGHLY
EQUAL TO HALF OF THE PROFITS
THAT THEY MADE LAST YEAR.
IT'S BEEN A VERY
EXSENSE-- EXPENSIVE
TRANSACTION FOR THEM.
IF THEY HAD TO DO IT AGAIN,
I SUSPECT THEY WOULDN'T.
>> WELL, THAT'S JUST NOT
TRUEMENT THOSE ARE THE
TALKING POINTS OF WALL
STREET.
BUT THE ACQUISITION OF BEAR
STEARNS AND WASHINGTON
MUTUAL WERE AT FIRE SALE
PRICES, THEY BOUGHT BEAR
STEARNS FOR 1.3 BILLION.
THE HEADQUARTER BUILDING
ALONE OF BEAR STEARNS ON
MADISON AVENUE NEW YORK WAS
WORTH 1.1 BILLION.
AND JAMIE DIMON REFUSED TO
DO THE DEAL UNTIL TAXPAYERS
PICKED UP THE RISK OF $30
BILLION.
THEY GOT THESE OPERATIONS AT
FIRE SALE PRICES AND THEY
HAVE BEEN SPECTACULARLY
SUCCESSFUL FOR JPMORGAN.
JAMIE DIMON IS NOT SOME R,
BE IN THE PUMPKIN PATCH, HE
KNEW WHAT HE WAS DOING.
I WILL GIVE YOU ONE FACT.
IN 2007 IF YOU TAKE THE BOOK
VALUE, WHAT YOU COULD GET
FOR JPMORGAN CHASE IF YOU
JUST SOLD ITS ASSETS, YOU
TAKE ITS BOOK VALUE AND
STRAIGHT LINE IT TO 2012,
AND YOU COMPARE IT TO WHAT
ITS BOOK VALUE IS TODAY,
THERE IS A $39 BILLION
DIFFERENCE.
AND THAT MEANS THE VALUE OF
JPMORGAN CHASE IS UP 39
BILLION DOLLARS, THAT'S NOT
AS A GOING ENTERPRISE.
THEY HAVE MADE SPECTACULAR
AMOUNTS OF MONEY FROM THESE
TWO ENTERPRISES.
>> Ifill: WHAT DID JAY ME
DIMON, HE IS A UNIQUE FIGURE
IN ALL OF THIS.
>> WELL, HE'S-- THE GUY
WITHOUT STUCK HIS NECK OUT
TO DO THIS DEAL.
HE'S BEEN A LEADER IN THE
INDUSTRY.
AND HE'S THE ONE WHO IS
TAKING THE HEAT FOR HAVING
DONE THIS DEAL.
I DO BELIEVE THAT HE'LL
CONTINUE TO RUN THE COMPANY,
I KNOW THERE ARE A LOT OF
PEOPLE THAT THINK HE OUGHT
TO RESIGN AND I SIMPLY DONE
THINK THAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN.
WHAT HE NEEDS TO DO AND HIS
MANAGEMENT TEAM NEEDS TO DO
IS GET THIS PROBLEM BEHIND
HIM SO THEY CAN RUN THEIR
BUSINESS.
>> DOES THE COMPANY HAVE TO
ADMIT WRONG DOING?
>> THIS HAS NEVER HAPPENED.
DOES THERE HAVE TO BE AN
INDIVIDUAL THAT HEADS THAT
ROLE AS DENNIS KELLEHER IS
SUGGESTING FOR THIS TO BE
REVOLUME OFED.
>> FIRST OF ALL THERE HAVE
BEEN A LOT OF PEOPLE THAT
LOST THEIR JOBS OVER THIS.
THE REAL QUESTION OF
PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY IS
GOING TO COME DOWN TO
WHETHER OR NOT THERE WILL BE
ANY CRIMINAL CHARGES BROUGHT
IN THIS SITUATION.
>> THAT'S STILL UNCLEAR.
AND WE MAY NOT KNOW FOR
MONTHS AS TO HOW THAT ASPECT
OF IT IS GOING TO GET
RESOLVED.
>> IN FACT CALIFORNIA AMONG
OTHER STATES IS PROBABLY
PURSUING THIS POTENTIAL FOR
CRIMINAL ACTION.
>> THE U.S. ATTORNEY IN
CALIFORNIA, ONE OF THEM IS
CONDUCTING AN INVESTIGATION
BUT THE LIKELIHOOD OF
CRIMINAL CHARGES AGAINST
EXECUTIVES AND SUPERVISORS
HERE ARE AS REMOTE AS
POSSIBLE.
THE STANDARD IS SO HIGH IN
EXACTING AS IT SHOULD BE FOR
CRIMINAL CHARGES, AND THAT'S
WHY IT'S SO IMPORTANT
FOR-TO-GO AFTER EXECUTIVES
AND SUPERVISORS ON THE CIVIL
SIDE SO THAT THEY HAVE TO
PAY REAL MEANINGFUL
PENALTIES AND THAT THEY ARE
HELD TO ACCOUNTS FOR THEIR
WRONGDOING.
>> LET'S GET BACK TO JAY ME
DIE UPON.
>> THIS ISN'T A MEANINGFUL
PENALTY?
>> FIRST OF ALL IT IS THE
BANK THAT IS PAYING, WHICH
MEANS IT IS SHAREHOLDERS
PAYING IT.
ESSENTIALLY JPMORGAN CHASE
IS BUYING A GET OUT OF JAIL
FREE CARD TODAY FOR ITS
EXECUTIVES AND SUPERVISORS
BY USING SHAREHOLDER'S MONEY,
ESSENTIALLY OTHER PEOPLE'S
MONEY.
NOT A SINGLE INDIVIDUAL IS
BEING HELD ACCOUNTABLE.
>> Ifill: DOES ANY OF THAT
MONEY GO TO HOMEOWNERS, FOR
INSTANCE?
>> AS I UNDERSTAND IT, $4
BILLION OF IT IS GOING TO BE
SET ASIDE TO HELP RESOLVE
PROBLEM MORTGAGES WHETHER IT
BE BUYING DOWN MORTGAGE
BALANCES OR COMPENSATION TO
PEOPLE WHOSE HOMES WERE FOR
CLOSED, IS YET TO BE WORKED
OUT.
BUT SUPPOSEDLY $4 BILLION OF
THE $13 BILLION WILL GO TO
ASSIST HOMEOWNERS THAT HAD
PROBLEMS OF ONE KIND OR
ANOTHER.
>> Ifill: I TAKE YOU DON'T
SEE IT AS A GET OUT OF JAIL
FREE CARD.
>> I DO NOT SEE IT AS A GET
OUT OF JAIL FREE CARD BY ANY
MEANS.
AGAIN I THINK THE REAL
CONCN IERS WHAT HAPPENS IN
THE FUTURE THERE WILL BE A
FUTURE FINANCIAL CRISIS.
THE GOVERNMENT WILL BE FACED
WITH HAVING TO DEAL WITH A
LARGE FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
AND IF THEY HAVE A SITUATION
THERE IS NO BUYER BECAUSE OF
UNRESOLVED LIABILITY ISSUES,
THEN THE COST ON THE
DISRUPTION OF LIQUIDATING A
LARGE FIRM INSTEAD OF
SELLING IS GOING TO BE VERY
SIGNIFICANT.
>> Ifill: FINAL WORD.
>> IF YOU DON'T HOLD PEOPLE
ACCOUNTABLE FOR EGREGIOUS,
SYSTEMIC WRONGDOING, THEN
THEY ARE GOING TO DO IT
AGAIN.
AND THIS SHOULDN'T BE A
DOUBLE STANDARD OF JUSTICE.
ONE FOR WALL STREET WHERE
THEY GET TREATED WITH KID
GLOVES BECAUSE THEY ARE
WEALTHY AND WELL CONNECTED
AND ONE FOR MAIN STREET
WHERE YOU GET THE BOOK
THROWN AT YOU IF YOU STEAL
$100.
IF IS WRONG.
IT IS CORROSIVE TO DEMOCRACY
THAT ACTUALLY REWARDS AND
INCENTIVIZES CRIME ON WALL
STREET.
SO YOU COULD HAVE THEM PAY A
LITTLE LESS MONEY IF YOU
WOULD HOLD SOME OF THE
INDIVIDUALS ACTUALLY
ACCOUNTABLE.
THAT'S WHAT WE NEED TO SEE
IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: DENNIS KELLEHER,
BETTER ELY, THANK YOU BOTH
SOME OF.
>> THANK YOU.
>> WE TURN NOW TO
>> Woodruff: WE TURN NOW TO
POLITICS, AND THE FALLOUT FROM
THE 16-DAY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
TONIGHT WE'RE LAUNCHING A SERIES
OF CONVERSATIONS ABOUT WHERE THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY GOES FROM HERE.
WE TALK WITH FORMER SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER TRENT LOTT, A
REPUBLICAN FROM MISSISSIPPI.
HE'S NOW A SENIOR FELLOW WITH
THE BIPARTISAN POLICY CENTER AND
A SENIOR COUNSEL AT THE LAW FIRM
PATTON BOGGS.
I SPOKE WITH HIM A SHORT TIME
AGO.
POLITICS
AND THE FALLOUT OF THE 16
DAY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN.
>> Woodruff: FORM TER
SENATOR TRENT LOTT WELCOME
TO THE NEWSHOUR.
>> GLAD TO BE BACK, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: SO CONSERVATIVE
ACTIVIST RICHARD VIGRY
REPORTED OVER THE BOOKnd SAY
WAG IS GOING ON IN YOUR
PARTY RIGHT NOW IS A CIVIL
WAR.
HOW DO YOU SEE?
>> WELL, WE DON'T NEED A
CIVIL WAR.
WE NEED TO FOCUS ON WHAT IS
A GOOD AGENDA FOR GROWTH IN
AMERICA.
AND WE NEED TO FOCUS ON HOW
WE CAN ADD SOME MORE
REPUBLICANS TO THE HOUSE,
BUT PARTICULARLY IN THE
SENATE SO WE WOULD CONTROL
BOTH BODIES.
SO I THINK WHAT WE NEED TO
DO IS FOCUS ON THE POSITIVE
AND QUIT ATTACKING EACH
OTHER.
>> Woodruff: BUT RIGHT NOW
YOU HAVE FACS IN YOUR PARTY,
ALL THE WAY FROM THE TEA
PARTY TO FOLKS WHO
SYMPATHIZE TO WITH THE TEA
PARTY ALL THE WAY TO A FEW
MODERATES.
>> IT IS TOUGHER NOW THAN IT
USED TO BE.
BUT IF LEADERSHIP, I ALWAYS
HAD TO DEAL WITH THAT TOO.
I HAD YOU KNOW, SOMETIMES
THE MORE MODERATE MEMBERS OF
MY CAUCUS WERE RELUCTANT TO
DO SOME OF THE THINGS WE
WANTED TO DO ON TAX CUTS OR
YOU KNOW, DEFENSE ISSUES.
AND THE HOUSE, OF COURSE,
YOU'VE GOT SOME VERY YOUNG
AND VERY CONSERVATIVE PEOPLE
THAT FEEL STRONGLY THAT
OBAMACARE IS GOING TO BE A
DISASTER FOR THE COUNTRY.
AND THEY CERTAINLY HAVE MADE
THAT POINT.
BUT I THINK THE IMPORTANT
THING NOW IS TO PIVOT TO
WHAT IS A POSITIVE AGENDA
THAT REPUBLICANS BELIEVE IN
AND WILL ADVOCATE AND TAKE
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
AND SO THEN IF YOU WERE AN.
>> IF YOU WERE AN
ESTABLISHMENT REPUBLICAN
THAT IS A DIRTY TERM, I
GUESS, THAT YOU HAVE GOT AN
AGENDA YOU CAN TALK ABOUT
THAT WILL APPEAL TO
EVERYBODY.
>> Woodruff: IS IT A DIRTY
TERM?
A DIRTY WORD TO SAY
MAINSTREAM STAENLT
REPUBLICAN?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I'VE BEEN
ACCUSED OF ALL OF THOSE.
ALTHOUGH I WAS CONSERVATIVE
BEFORE A LOT OF THESE PEOPLE
WERE BORN.
I HAVE A VERY CONSERVATIVE
PHILOSOPHYMENT BUT ALSO, I
ADMIT THAT I HAVE A
PHILOSOPHY OF TRYING TO GET
THINGS DONE.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHAT YOU
NEED TO TALK ABOUT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS WE
NEED TO BE DOING IN
GOVERNMENT AND IN AMERICA
THAT IS NOT HAPPENING RIGHT
NOW.
FOR INSTANCE, THE REALLY BIG
NEWS IN AMERICA TODAY IS IN
THE ENERGY AREA.
JUST RECENTLY WE SURPASSED
RUSSIA AS THE NUMBER ONE
ENERGY PRODUCING COUNTRY IN
THE WORLD.
IT'S ABOUT NATIONAL SECURITY,
IT'S ABOUT JOBS, IT'S ABOUT
GROWTH.
WHY DON'T THEY TAKE UP THE
MAJOR ENERGY BILL, JUST ONE
EXAMPLE.
>> Woodruff: BUT RIGHT NOW
YOU DO HAVE MEMBERS, I'M
SURE YOU KNOW THIS, THE TEA
PARTY SAYING WE STILL WANT
TO DEFUND AND DO AWAY WITH
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE
LAW.
>> WELL.
>> Woodruff: AN THEY'RE NOT
FOCUSED ON SOME OF THESE
OTHER ISSUES.
>> WELL, THEY SHOULD BE.
AND A AGREE WITH THEM.
I WOULD HAVE VOTED AGAINST
OBAMACARE.
AND I WOULD VOTE TO REPEAL
IT RIGHT NOW OR DELAY IT A
YEAR.
EVEN THE PRESIDENT JUST CAME
OUT TODAY AND SAID LOOK,
IT'S A MESS.
HE'S NOT HAPPY WITH IT
EITHER.
>> Woodruff: BUT WAS IT
WORTH SHUTTING DOWN THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> I DON'T THINK SO I
THOUGHT THAT THE TACTICS
THAT WERE USED WERE NOT WISE.
THE REPUBLICANS SHOULD FOCUS
ON WHAT WE CAN DO TO HELP
THE ECONOMY GROW.
THE PEOPLE OUT HERE IN THE
REAL WORLD, THEY ARE STILL
WORRIED ABOUT HOW ARE THEY
GOING MAKE A LIVING, ARE
THEY ABLE TO GET A JOB.
THAT IS WHAT THE FOCUS
SHOULD BE.
BUT ALSO THE THING THAT
UNITES REPUBLICANS IS
CONTROLLING 9 SIZE OF THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND
CONTROLLING SPENDING IT IS
OUT OF CONTROL.
THE DEBT SEALING THIS NEXT
YEAR IF THEY DON'T GET SOME
SPENDING RESTRAINT WILL GO
UP ANOTHER TRILLION DOLLARS.
THAT IS A BIG PROBLEM FOR
OUR GRANDCHILDREN.
SO THAT'S WHAT I THINK THEY
SHOULD FOCUS ON INSTEAD
OF-- IT'S NOT ENOUGH TO JUST
SAY NO TO OBAMACARE.
I WOULD LIKE TO REPEAL IT
BUT IT'S NOT GOING TO BE
REPEALED AS LONG AS THE
DEMOCRATS ARE IN CHARGE IN
THE SENATE AND OBAMA IS IN
THE WHITE HOUSE.
THEY'VE MADE THEIR POINT.
THEY DON'T LIKE OBAMACARE.
THEY TRIED A LOT OF
DIFFERENT TYPES OF WAYS TO
DEAL WITH IT.
THEY FOUGHT THE GOOD FIGHT
BUT THAT FIGHT IS OVER.
SO NOW WHAT ARE THEY GOING
TO DO.
>> Woodruff: BUT DO YOU
THINK-- I MEAN HOW DO YOU
BRIDGE THESE DIFFERENCES,
SENATOR LOTT.
WE HEAR WHAT YOU ARE SAYING,
BUT YOU STILL HAVE THESE
VERY CONSERVATIVE MEMBERS OF
THE PARTY WHO ARE SAYING
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
FIGHT ON OBAMACARE.
WE NOT ONLY WANT TO LIMIT
GOVERNMENT SPENDING, WE WANT
TO SHRINK THE SIZE OF
GOVERNMENT DRAMATICALLY.
>> YEAH, WELL, I AGREE WITH
THAT.
I DO WANT TO SHRINK THE SIZE
OF GOVERNMENT.
WHAT WEED IS AN A AGAINA
TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEMS THAT
WE HAVE.
PRINCIPLES THE PRESIDENT
MENTIONED THAT WE NEEDED TO
DO A FARM BILL.
SOME PEOPLE ENGINEERED AT
THAT, THAT IS THE BIGGEST
THING ON THE AGENDA.
AS A MATTER OF FACT, THE
FARM BILL HAS ALLOTS OF
REFORMS IN IT.
IT DOES REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF
FARM SUBSIDIES THAT ARE PADZ
OUT IT DOES HAVE MAJOR
REFORM IN FOOD STAMPS.
THAT, BOTH OF THOSE ARE
IMPORTANT.
BUT WE DO NEED A FARM POLICY
IN AMERICA.
I HAVE ALREADY MENTIONED
ENERGY.
THEY NEED A DEAL WITH HOW
MUCH ARE THEY GOING FUND THE
GOVERNMENT.
THEY SHOULD BE PASSING
APPROPRIATIONS BILLS.
THEY SHOULD PASS DEFENSE
AUTHORIZATION.
WE STILL HAVE MILITARY MEN
AND WOMEN IN THE FIELD.
AND THE COMBINATION OF HOW
MUCH WE'RE SPENDING AND THE
SEQUESTER IS HAVING A REAL
PROBLEM ON THE DEFENSE
CAPABILITIES OF OUR COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: SO IF YOU WERE
TO HAVE A CONVERSATION RIGHT
NOW WITH SENATOR TED CRUZ OF
TEXAS AND SOME OF THE HOUSE
MEMBERS WHO AGREED WITH HIM
STRATEGY, WHAT WOULD YOU SAY
TO THEM?
>> WELL, I WOULD SAY YOU
FELT VERY STRONGLY.
YOU MADE YOUR CASE.
THAT FIGHT THOUGH, YOU WILL
ALWAYS BE LOOKING FOR A WAY
TO PUT SOME CONTROLS ON
OBAMACARE OR EVENTUALLY
REPEAL IT BUT YOU NEED TO
FOCUS NOW ON WHAT CAN BE
DONE IN A POSITIVE WAY.
WHAT ARE SOME GOOD THINGS
THAT AMERICA SHOULD BE DOING
NOW.
THAT GROUP MIGHT NOT LIKE
WHAT I'M ABOUT TO SAY.
BUT THERE IS A BILL THAT
WILL BE MOVING IN THE HOUSE
SOON CALLED WATER RESOURCES
DEVELOPMENT ACT.
WE HAVE BRIDGES AND HIGHWAYS
AND PORTS AND HARBORS AND
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS ALL
OVER AMERICA THAT ARE
COLLAPSING.
THEY CREATE JOBS.
>> Woodruff: INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> INFRASTRUCTURE.
I WILL TILL THE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT OBAMA
CAULKS B HE WANTS TO HAVE A
BANK THAT WILL BECOME A
SLUSH FUND.
NO, YOU NEED TO CLEARLY SAY
IT'S GOING TO GO FOR THIS
PARTICULAR PORT, FOR A WATER
SYSTEM IN JACKSON, MICHIGAN,
OR JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI.
THAT IS SOMETHING PEOPLE
WOULD SAY IT'S TANGIBLE.
YOU CAN SEE A RESULT IT
WOULD CREATE JOBS.
>> Woodruff: BUT IF THEY
DON'T AGREE WITH YOU AND
OTHERS WHO BELIEVE IN THAT,
THEN HOW, ACCOUNT PARTY
REALLY COME TOGETHER?
>> WELL, REMEMBER NOW, I
WENT THROUGH THIS IN 1995
WHEN WE HAD THE SHUTDOWN.
I DIDN'T THINK IT WAS A GOOD
IDEA THEN EITHER.
WE CAME OUT OF IT AND WHAT
DID WE DO TO GO FORWARD?
WE DEVELOPED A POSITIVE
AGENDA.
WE WILL WELFARE REFORM.
WE HAD A BALANCED BUDGET
LEGISLATION THAT WAS PASSED.
WE PASSED SAFE DRINKING
WATER.
WHO IS OPPOSED TO SAVE
DRINKING WATER, PORTABLE OF
INSURANCE.
WE PIVOTED AND WENT TO A
POSITIVE AGENDA AND THE NET
RESULT WAS WE PICKED UP A
GAIN OF TWO SEAT AS SOON AS
THE-- IN THE SENATE.
SO WHAT I WOULD URGE THEM TO
DO IS WHAT ARE YOU FOR NOW,
AS YOUNG REPUBLICAN HOUSE
MEMBERS.
WHAT WOULD YOU DO IF YOU
WERE IN THE MAJORITY.
IF YOU CAN'T REPEAL
OBAMACARE OR REFORM IT RIGHT
NOW, WHAT ELSE WOULD YOU DO.
AND GET ON THAT.
>> Woodruff: WE HEAR YOU.
FORMER SENATOR TRENT LOTT,
THANK YOU FOR BEING WITH US.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT,
STRUGGLING TO BREATHE IN CHINA.
11 MILLION RESIDENTS GROUND TO A
HALT AFTER OFFICIALS DISCOVERED
THAT THE REGION'S "SMALL
PARTICAL POLLUTION" HAS REACHED
RECORD LEVELS-- 40 TIMES HIGHER
THAN THE INTERNATIONAL SAFETY
STANDARD.
PLANES DIDN'T FLY, BUSES WEREN'T
ALLOWED ON ROADS, AND SCHOOLS
WERE CLOSED.
JEFFREY BROWN IS BACK WITH MORE.
CHINA HAS SEEN TREMENDOUS
ECONOMIC AND URBAN GROWTH
BUT ONE OF THE COSTS IS SOME
OF THE WORST AIR QUALITY IN
THE WORLD.
IT'S A HEALTH ISSUE AND
INCREASINGLY A POLITICAL ONE
AS WELL.
A REQUIRE FOR "THE NEW
YORKER" MAGAZINE JUST
REASONED TO THE U.S. AFTER
LIVING IN BEIJING FOR EIGHT
YEARS AND JOINS US NOW,
WELCOME TO YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE
OF A READING THIS HIGH.
YOU WATCHED THIS FOR MANY
YEAR, PUT IT IN SOME
CONTEXT.
>> THIS IS UNUSUALLY HIGH.
THIS IS, TO PUT IT IN
PERSPECTIVE PEOPLE WALKED
OUT OF THEIR HOUSES TODAY
AND THOUGHT THAT THERE WAS A
BLIZZARD.
BUT IN FACT IT WASN'T
SNOWING.
THIS IS HOW INTENSE THE AIR
POLLUTION WASMENT THEY HAD
TO CLOSE THE AIRPORT.
THIS HE HAD TO CLOSE SCHOOLS.
>> Brown: IT IS STUNNING TO
SAY, JUST THE IDEA OF
SHUTTING DOWN A CITY OF 11
MILLION PEOPLE OR SO.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
>> A CITY OF TWO AND A HALF
TIMES THE SIZE OF LOS
ANGELES.
THIS IS WAY UP IN THE
NORTHEAST CORNER OF THE
COUNTRY.
IT'S SORT OF THE BUFFALO OF
CHINA.
IT'S VERY COLD.
AND THE HEAT CAME ON
YESTERDAY.
THAT WAS THE FIRST BIG COLD
DAY OF THE WINTER.
AND WHEN THAT HAPPENED THAT
MEANT THAT THEY BURNED ALL
OF THIS COAL.
AND ALL THAT COAL WENT INTO
THE ATMOSPHERE AND IT SPIKED
AND YOU GOT THIS
EXTRAORDINARY, INTENSE AIR
POLLUTION.
>> Brown: SO WHEN, YOU SAY
THE HEAT CAME ON,
MEANING-- LITERALLY THIS IS
HOW THE HEATING SYSTEM
WORKS.
>> THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT
STILL MAINTAINS VERY STRONG
CONTROL AROUND THE COUNTRY,
OBVIOUSLY.
AND ONE OF THE WAYS IT DOES
THAT IS THAT IT SETS THE DAY
WHEN THE HEAT GOES ON.
SO WHEN THE HEAT GOES ON FOR
A CITY OF 11 MILLION PEOPLE,
THAT SETS AN ENORMOUS STRAIN
ON THE SYSTEM.
SO YOU'VE GOT THAT.
AND THEN ON TOP OF IT OVER
THE COURSE OF THE LAST TEN
YEARS CHINA HAS ADDED FOUR
TIMES AS MANY CARS TO THE
SYSTEM AS THERE WAS BEFORE.
IN JUST TEN YEARS.
SO YOU HAVE THE COMBINATION
OF COAL AND CARS, NO WIND,
AND YOU'VE GOT THIS
EXTRAORDINARY POLLUTION.
>> Brown: SO AS THIS HAS
BEEN HAPPENING AND NOT JUST
IN THIS CITY, OF COURSE.
WHAT KIND OF PUSHINGBACK IS
THERE?
WHAT KIND OF RESPONSE IS
THERE NOW?
>> PEOPLE ARE LOSING THEIR
PATIENCE WITH IT.
FOR YEARS THE ARGUE IN CHINA
THAT YOU HEARD FROM ODE
PEOPLE WAS OUR LIVES ARE
GETTING BETTER.
WE HAVE CARS WE DIDN'T HAVE
BEFORE.
WE HAVE APARTMENTS WE
COULDN'T AFFORD BEFORE.
AND WE'RE WILLING TO PUT UP
WITH AIR POLLUTION.
THEY'RE NOT AS WILLING AS
THEY WERE BEFORE.
IF YOU GO ON-LINE ON THE
CHINESE WEB YOU SEE PEOPLE
SAYING THINGS LIKE WELCOME
TO THE MIDDLE CLASS AND THEY
MEAN IT BITTERLY.
THIS IS NOT WHAT THEY
WANTED.
>> Brown: BECAUSE THIS WAS
SORT OF PART OF THE DEAL,
RIGHT, AS I MENTIONED
ECONOMIC GROWTH WHICH WAS
COMING, AND HAS COME.
AND THAT'S MEANT HUGE URBAN
GROWTH TO CITIES LIKE THIS.
>> YEAH.
>> Brown: BUT THIS IS ALSO
NOW A PART OF THE DEAL
PEOPLE ARE LESS HAPPY WITH.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
IT'S TRANSFORMED THE
COUNTRY.
THERE IS NO QUESTION ABOUT
IT.
PEOPLE TODAY COMPARED TO 30
YEARS AGO, THEIR LIVES ARE
IMPOSSIBLE TO COMPARE.
HOWEVER, THEY WORRY ABOUT
THE HEALTH OF THEIR
CHILDREN.
THERE HAS BEEN, NOW CANCER
IS THE LEADING CAUSE OF
DEATH IN CHINA.
THEY NOW KNOW HOW MANY DIE
FROM AIR POLLUTION EVERY
YEAR, 1.2 MILLION PEOPLE.
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT
PEOPLE KNOW ABOUT.
IN THE PAST CHINESE
GOVERNMENT DID NOT RELEASE
THE DATA ON THE AIR
POLLUTION.
NOBODY KNEW HOW BAD IT WAS.
THEY CAN'T DO THAT ANY MORE.
THERE IS KNOW SOCIAL MEDIA
AND THEY HAVE NO CHOICE.
THEY TALK ABOUT IT.
>> Brown: YOU'VE WRITTEN
ABOUT THIS, ABOUT WHAT IT
MEANS IN DAY-TO-DAY LIFE,
JUST GIVE US A LITTLE SENSE
OF HOW PEOPLE HAVE TO-- HOW
THEY COPE.
>> I MEAN I WILL GIVE YOU AN
EXAMPLE.
WE LIVED IN CHINA, MY WIFE
AND I FOR EIGHT YEARS AFTER
WE HAD BEEN THERE FOR A
WHILE PEOPLE REALIZED THE
BEST CHRISTMAS PRESENT WE
COULD GET WERE AIR PURIFIERS,
WE WOULD GO IN TO FRIEND'S
HOUSE AND COMMENT ON THE AIR
PURIFIER T IT BECAME A PART
OF LIFE.
I MEN THIS IS, 10 YEARS AGO
NOBODY KNEW THAT THE LEADERS
OF THE YES LIVED IN A
DIFFERENT ENVIRONMENT THAN
THE ODE PEOPLE DID.
BUT NOW THEY KNOW THAT THE
PEOPLE WHO RUN THE COUNTRY
HAVE AIR PURIFIERS IN THEIR
HOMES.
>> Brown: THAT IS PART OF
THIS, THE POLITICS OF THIS,
THE PEOPLE WHO CAN DEAL WITH,
CAN COPE AND CAN PAY.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Brown: TO GET AWAY FROM
IT.
>> THEY USED TO SAY THE AIR
QUALITY COULDN'T BE THAT BAD
WAS AFTER ALL THE LEADERS
HAVE TO BREATHE THE SAME AIR
WE DO.
AND THEN PEOPLE STARTED
GOING ON-LINE, STARTED TO
FIND OUT THAT IN FACT THERE
IS THIS-- A SORT OF DUAL
UNIVERSE.
THERE IS THE WORLD FOR
EVERYBODY.
AND THEN THERE IS THE WORLD
FOR THE TOP LEADERSHIP.
AND THEY'RE NOT HAPPY WITH
IT ANY MORE.
THEY COMPLAIN.
>> Brown: BRIEFLY, I MEAN
COMPLAIN BUT IS IT A
POTENTIAL POLITICAL ISSUE
GOING FORWARD?
>> IT'S BEEN A LUGE
POLITICAL ISSUE.
ALREADY YOU'VE HAD PROTESTS
OVER THE POSSIBLE
CONSTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL
PLANTS, FOR INSTANCE.
PEOPLE WHO DIDN'T ORDINARILY
HAVE A POLITICAL BONE IN
THEIR BODIES IS HAVE GOTTEN
UP AND SAID WHAT I WORRY
ABOUT IS THE HEALTH OF MY
KIDS.
AND SO THEY WILL GO OUT INTO
THE STREETS AND HAVE WHAT
THEY CALL STROLLING PROTESTS
WHERE THEY GO OUT AND SAY
WE'RE NOT TRYING TO TOME THE
GOVERNMENT.
ALL WE'RE SAYING IS LISTEN
TO US AND PRIORITIZE US KBZ
THAS SNKOME OF.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID THERE WAS
"NO EXCUSE" FOR THE PROBLEMS
PLAGUING THE NEW HEALTH CARE WEB
SITE, BUT DEFENDED THE BROADER
LAW.
NEW JERSEY BECAME THE 14th
STATE TO SANCTION GAY
MARRIAGE.
AS GOVERNOR CHRIS CHRISTIE
DROPPED PLANS FOR FURTHER
LEGAL CHALLENGES.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, OUR SOCIAL
SECURITY EXPERT EXPLAINS HOW AND
WHEN TO COLLECT BENEFITS ON AN
EX-SPOUSE'S WORK RECORD.
THAT'S ON OUR "MAKING SENSE"
PAGE.
AND IN CASE YOU MISSED IT THIS
WEEKEND: YOU CAN WATCH OUR
REPORT FROM HAWAII, WHERE A
BATTLE HAS ERUPTED BETWEEN
RESIDENTS OF KAUAI AND LARGE
COMPANIES OVER THE DEVELOPMENT
OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED SEEDS.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
LATEST JOBS REPORT, DELAYED
WEEKS BY THE SHUTDOWN, AND WHAT
IT SAYS ABOUT THE EMPLOYMENT
PICTURE IN AMERICA.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR,  THANK YOU, AND GOOD
NIGHT.